The Wisdom of Insecurities
“Whoever shall save his soul shall lose it” (9)
The harder I try to find the meaning the life, the further it runs away
Spiraling – stop fighting something
“Insecurity is the result of trying to be secure, and that, contrariwise, salvation and sanity consist in the most radical recognition that we have no way of saving ourselves” (9)
“But you cannot understand life and its mysteries as long as you try to grasp it” (24)
“To ‘have’ running water you must let go of it and let it run” (24)
“Paradox as it may seem, we likewise find life meaningful only when we have seen that it is without purpose, and know the ‘mystery of the universe’ only when we are convinced that we know thing about it at all” (27)
“The discovery of the mystery, the wonder beyond all wonders, needs no belief, for we can only believe in what we have already known, preconceived, and imagined. But this is beyond any imagination. We have to open the eyes of the mind wide enough, and “the truth will out” (28)
“Because such a loss is the principle the same as death, this means that the more we struggle for life (as pleasure), the more we are actually killing what we love” (32). 
“The only way to make sense out of change is to plunge into it, move with it, and join the dance” (43). 
“In somewhat the same way, thoughts, ideas, and words are ‘coins’ for real things. They are not those things, and though they represent them, there are many ways in which they do not correspond at all. As with memory and wealth, so with thoughts and things: ideas and words are more or less fixed, whereas real things change” (45). 
Let go of things that no longer serve me
“To feel that life is meaningless unless “I” can be permanent is like having fallen desperately in love with an inch” (48)
“Words and measures do not give life; they merely symbolize it” (48)
“The clash between science and religion has not shown that religion is false and science is true. It has shown that all systems of definition are relative to various purposes, and that none of them actually “grasp” reality” (51)
“Religion wants to assure the future beyond death, and science wants to assure it until death, and to postpone death. But tomorrow and plans for tomorrow can have no significance at all unless you are in full contact with the reality of the present, since it is in the present and only in the present that you live” (51)
“I am sure, however, that the body dies because it wants to. It finds it beyond its power to resist the disease or to mend the injury, and so, tear it out with the struggle, turns to death. If the consciousness were more sensitive to the feelings and impulses of the whole Organism, it would share this desire, and, indeed, sometimes does so. We come close to it when, in serious sickness, we would just as soon die, though sometimes we survive, either because medical treatment reinvigorates the body, or because there are still unconscious forces in the Organism which are able to heal” (67)
“But to be used rightly, it must be put in its place, for the brain is made for man, not man for his brain. In other words, the function of the brain is sister of the present and the real, not to send men chasing wildly after the phantom of the future” (71)
“What we have to discover is that there is no safety, and that seeking it is painful, and that when we imagine that we have found it, we don't like it. In other words, if we can really understand what we're looking for - that safety is isolation, and what we do to ourselves when we look for it - we shall see that we do not want it at all. No one has to tell you that you should not hold your breath for 10 minutes. You know that you can't do it, and that the attempt is most uncomfortable” (79)
“The principle thing is to understand that there is no safety or security” (79)
“The art of living is this ‘predicament’ is neither careless drifting on the one hand nor fearful clinging to the past and the known to the other period it consists in being completely sensitive to each moment, in regarding it as utterly new and unique, and having the mind open and holy receptive” (95)
“This is not a philosophical theory but an experiment. One has to make the experiment to understand that it brings into play altogether new powers of adaptation to life, of literally absorbing pain and insecurity. It is as hard to describe how this absorption works as to explain the beating of one's heart by the formation of genes. The ‘open’ mind does this as most of us breathe: without being able to explain it at all. The principle of The thing is clearly something like judo, the gentle (ju) way (do) of mastering and opposing force by giving into it” (95)
“Sometimes, when resistance seizes, the pain simply goes away or dwindles to an easily tolerable ache. At other times it remains, but the absence of any resistance brings about a way of feeling pain so unfamiliar as to be hard to describe. The pain is long no longer problematic. I can feel it, but there is no urge to get rid of it, for I have discovered that pain and the effort to be separate from it are the same thing. Wanting to get out of pain is the pain; it is not the ‘reaction’ of a of an ‘I’ distinct from the pain. When you discover this, the desire to escape merges into the pain itself and vanishes” (98)
Stop trying to fight everything
“This, in turn, depends upon seeing that you have really no choice but to be aware because you cannot separate yourself from the present and you cannot define it. You can, indeed, refuse to admit this, but only at the cost of the immense and futile effort of spending your whole life resisting the inevitable” (99)
“To be silent is not to lose your tongue. On the contrary, it is the only it is only through silence that one can discover something new to talk about. One who talked incessantly, without stopping to look and listen, would repeat himself ad nauseum” (101)
“But going beyond thought is not reserved to men genius. It is open to all of us insofar as ‘the mystery of life is not a problem to be solved, but a reality to be experienced’” (102) 
“Nevertheless, the physical reality is that my body exists only in relation to this universe, and in fact I am as attached to it and dependent on it as a leaf on a tree. I feel cut off only because I'm split within myself, because I try to be divided from my own feelings and sensations. What I feel and sense therefore seems foreign to me. And I'm being aware of the unreality of this division, the universe does not seem foreign anymore” (108)
“Certainly I cannot command the sun to be egg shaped, known force your brain to think differently. I cannot see the inside of the sun, nor can I share your private feelings. Yet neither can I change the shape or structure of my own brain, nor have a sensation of it as a contraption like cauliflower. But if my brain is nonetheless I, the sun is I, the errors I, and society, of which you are a member, is also I - for all these things are just as essential to my existence as my brain” (109) 
“he is not, then, at one with himself until he realizes that this ‘under side’ of nature and the feelings of horror which it gives him are also ‘I’” (111)
“A young man in search of spiritual wisdom put himself under the instruction of a celebrated holy man. The sage made himself his personal attendant, and after some months the young man complained that thus far he had received no instruction. “What do you mean!” exclaimed the holy man. “When you brought me my rice, didn't I eat it? When you brought me my tea, didn't I drink it? When you made salutations to me, didn't I return them? One of my ever injected to give you instruction?” “I'm afraid I don't understand,” said the young man, totally mystified. “When you want to see into it answered the sage see into it directly. When you begin to think about it is altogether missed” (112-113)
“If the universe is meaningless, so is the statement that it is so. If this world is a vicious trap, so is its accuser, and the pot is calling the kettle black”
“In the strictest sense, we cannot actually think about life and reality at all, because this would have to include thinking about thinking, thinking about thinking about thinking, and so ad infinitum”
“To ‘know’ reality you cannot stand outside it and define it; You must enter into it, be it, and feel it” (114)
“When, on the other hand, you realize that you live in, that indeed you are this moment now, and no other, that apart from this there is no past and no future, you must relax and taste to the full, whether it be pleasure or pain. At once it becomes obvious why this universe exists, why conscious beings have been produced, why sensitive organs, why space, time, and change. The whole problem with justifying nature, of trying to make life seems mean something in terms of its future, disappears utterly. Obviously, it all exists for this moment. It is a dance, and when you are dancing you are not intent on getting somewhere. You go round and round, but not under the illusion that you are pursuing something, or fleeing from the jaws of hell” (116)
“The meaning and purpose of dancing is the dance” (116)
“When each moment becomes an expectation life is deprived of fulfillment, and death is dreaded for it seems that here expectation must come to an end. While there is life there is hope - and if one lives on hope, death is indeed the end. But to the undivided mind, death is another moment, complete like every moment to, and cannot yield its secret and must look to the full - and I laid me down with a will” (117)
“Nothing is more creative than death, since it is the whole secret of life. It means that the past must be abandoned, that the unknown cannot be avoided, and that ‘I’ cannot continue, and that nothing can be ultimately fixed. When a man knows this, he lives for the first time in his life. By holding his breath, he loses it. By letting it go he finds it” (117). 
“Indeed, one of the highest pleasures is to be more or less unconscious of one's own existence, to be absorbed in interesting sites, sounds, places, and people. Conversely, one of the greatest pains is to be self-conscious, to feel unabsorbed and cut off from the community and the surrounding world” (121)
“The meaning of freedom can never be grasped by the divided mind. If I feel separate from my experience, and from the world, freedom will seem to be the extent to which I can push the world around, and fate the extent to which the world pushes me around. But to the whole mind there is no contrast of ‘I’ and the world. There's just one process acting, and it does everything that happens. It raises my little finger and it creates earthquakes. Or, if you want to put it that way, I raise my little finger and also make earthquakes. No one fates and no one is being fated” (122)
“The sense of not being free comes from trying to do things which are impossible and even meaningless. You are not ‘free’ to draw a square circle, to live without a head, or to stop certain reflex actions. These are not obstacles to freedom; they are conditions of freedom. I am not free to draw circle if perchance it should turn out to be a square circle. I am not, thank heaven, free to walk out the doors and leave my head at home. Likewise I am not free to live in any moment but this one, or to separate myself from my feelings. In short I am not free when I'm trying to do something contradictory, such as to move without changing position, or to burn my finger without feeling” (124)
“But in fact I am chained to the fear only so long as I am trying to get away from it. On the other hand, when I do not try to get away I discover that there is nothing ‘stuck’ or fixed about the reality of the moment. When I am aware of this feeling without naming it, without calling it ‘fear’, ‘bad’, ‘negative’, etc., it changes instantly into something else and life moves freely ahead. The feeling no longer perpetuates itself by creating the feeler behind it” (130)
“When you are dying and coming to life and each moment, would-be scientific predictions about what will happen after death are of little consequence. The whole glory of it is that we do not know. Ideas of survival and annihilation are alike based on the past, on memories of waking and sleeping, and, in their different ways, the notions of everlasting continuity and everlasting nothingness are without meaning” (144)
“We do not really want continuity, but rather present experience of total happiness. The thought of wanting such an experience to go on and on is a result of being self-conscious in the experience, and thus incompletely aware of it. So long as there is the feeling of and ‘I’ having this experience, the moment is not all. Eternal life is realized when the last trace even difference between ‘I’ and ‘now’ has vanished when there is just this ‘now’ and nothing else” (145) 
“It is obvious that the only interesting people are interested people, and to be completely interested is to have forgotten about ‘I’” (148)
“And the fascinating mystery of what it is that we mark and measure must in the end ‘tease us out of thought’ until the mind begins to circle and to pursue its own processes, and becomes aware that to be in this moment is pure miracle” (150)
“Discovering this the mind becomes whole: the split between I and me, man in the world, the ideal and the real, constant end. Paranoia, the mind beside itself, becomes metanoia, the mind with itself and so free from itself. Free from clutching at themselves the hands can handle; free from looking after themselves the eyes can see; free from trying to understand itself thought can think. In such feeling, seeing, and thinking life requires no future to complete itself or explanation to justify itself. In this moment it is finished” (152)


The Book
“In other words, there is no such thing as a halfway, or or a particle all by itself without any space around it. There is no on with that off, no up without down” (26)
“The cat wasn't born as a head wedge, sometime later, cause detail; It was born all of a piece, a head tailed cat” (31)
“You saw, but did not really look” (33)
“I am not saying that there is no personal continuity beyond death - only that believing in it keeps us in bondage” (40)
“Suppressing the fear of death makes it all the stronger” (40)
“If you are afraid of death, be afraid. The point is to get with it, to let it take over - fear, ghosts, pains, transience, disillusion, and all. And then comes a hitherto unbelievable surprise; You don't die because you were never born. You had just forgotten who you are” (40)
“This is why many people object to having their fortunes told: not that fortune telling is mere superstition without the predictions would be horrible, but simply that the more surely the future is known, the less surprise and less fun and living it” (45)
“Here applies the French proverb…  the more it changes come with the more it's the same thing. Change is in some sense an illusion, for we are always at the point where any future can take us! If the human race develops an electronic nervous system, outside the bodies of individual people, thus giving us all one mind and one global body, this is almost precisely what has happened in the organization of cells which compose our own bodies. We have already done it” (47)
“The fact is that because no one thing or feature of this universe is separable from the whole, the only real you, or self, is the whole” (53)
“this controlling officer quote sees” sites, “hears” sounds, “feels” feelings, and “has” experiences. These are common but redundant ways of talking, for seeing a site is just seeing, hearing a sound is just hearing, feeling a feeling is just feeling, and having an experience is just experiencing. But that these redundant phrases are so commonly used shows us most people think of themselves as separate from their thoughts and experiences” (55)
“one of the most important items in this officer's equipment is as a recording and filing system - the memory which he constantly “consults” so as to know how to interpret and respond to sensory input. Without this equipment, he would have no sensation of constancy - of being the same officer as he was seconds ago. Although memory records are much more fluid and elusive than photographic film or magnetic tape, the accumulation of memories is an essential part of the ego sensation. It gives the impression of oneself, the officer, asked something that remains while life goes by as if the conscious self were stable mirror reflecting passing procession. further exaggerates the feeling of separateness, of oneself changing at a pace so much lower than outside events and inside thoughts that you seem to stand aside from them as an independent observer” (55)
“After all, your neurons are part of my external world, and mine of yours! All our insides are outside, there in the physical world. But, conversely, the outside world has no color, shape, weight, heat, or motion without “inside” brains. It has these qualities only in relation to brains which are, in turn, members of itself” (56)
“It is not a game of billiards in which the balls knocked each other around in a cause-and-effect series. What were causes and effects to us were to them “correlatives” - events that arose mutually, like back and front. The “parts” of their universe were not separable, but as fully interwoven as the act of selling with the act of buying” (67)
“obviously, these particles do not by themselves constitute the human body. The whole is greater than the sum of its parts if only for the fact that a scientific description of the body must take account the order or pattern in which the particles are arranged and of what they are doing” (67)
“if, then, the definition of a thing or event must include definition of its environment, we realize that any given thing goes with a given environment so intimately and in separably that it is more difficult to draw clear boundary between the thing and it's surroundings”(68)
But this is at the same time a vivid way of saying that our soul, or rather your essential self, is the whole cosmos as it is centered around the particular time, place, and activity called John doe. Thus the soul is not in the body, but the body in the soul, and the soul is the entire network of relationships and processes which make up our environment, and apart from which you are nothing” (68-69) 
“Faith - in life, and other people, and oneself - is the attitude of allowing the spontaneous to be spontaneous, its own way and in its own time. This, of course, is risky because life and other people do not always respond to fate as we might wish. Fate is always a gamble because life itself is a gambling game with what must appear, in the hiding aspect of the game, to be colossal stakes. But to take the gamble out of the game, to try to make winning a dead certainty, is to achieve a certainty which is indeed dead. The alternative to a community based on mutual trust is totalitarian police state, a community in which spontaneity is virtually forbidden” (74)
“For unless one is able to live fully in the present, the future is a hoax. There is no point whatever in making plans for future which you will never be able to enjoy. When your plans mature, you will still be living for some other future beyond. You will never come and never be able to sit back with full contentment and say, “now, I've arrived!” your entire education is deprived of this capacity because it was preparing you for the future, instead of showing you how to be alive now” (80)
“For our pleasures are not material pleasures but symbols of pleasure - attractively packaged but are inferior and content” (83)
“Without birth and death, and without the perpetual transmutation of all forms of life, the world would be static, rhythmless, and dancing, mummified” (85)
“but the point is that, in either case, the movement of any feature of the world cannot be ascribed to the outside alone or to the inside alone. Both move together” (91)
“In the same measure, we have lagged the proper self-respect of recognizing that “I”, the individual organism, am a structure of such fabulous ingenuity that it calls the whole universe into being. In the act of putting everything at a distance so as to describe and control it, we have orphaned ourselves both from the surrounding world and from our own bodies leaving “I” as a discontented and alienated spook, anxious, guilty, unrelated, and alone.
We have attained a view of the world and a type of sanity which is dried-out like a rusty beer can on the beach. It is a world of objects, of nothing but as ordinary as a formica table with chromium fittings. We find it immensely reassuring except that it won't stay put, and must therefore be defended even at the cost of scouring the whole planet back to nice clean rock. For life is, after all, a rather messy and gooey accident in our basically a geological universe. “if a man son asks for bread, will he give him a stone?” the answer is probably, “Yes””
“For eternally and always there is only now, one and the same now; The present is the only thing that has no end” (108)
“the peace can be made only by those who are peaceful, and love can be shown only by those who love. No work of love will flourish out of guilt, fear, or hollowness of heart, just has no valid plans for the future it can be made by those who have no capacity for living now” ( 112 )
“but since there must be something somewhere, expectation is kindled again to keep us all going for that golden, the luxurious goodie at the end of the line” ( 114 )
“the reason is that we have scrubbed the world clean of magic. We have lost even the vision of paradise, so that our artists and Craftsman could no longer discern its forms. This is the price that must be paid for attempting to control the world from the standpoint of an eye from whom everything that can be experienced is a foreign object and nothing but” ( 115 )
“I would never be able to know that I belong to the in Group of “nice” or “saved” people without the assistance of an outgroup of “nasty” or “damned” people” ( 117 )
“in the same way, the more resolutely you Plumb the question “who or what am I?” the more unavoidable is the realization that you are nothing at all apart from everything else. Yet again the more you strive for some kind of perfection or mastery in morals, in art, or in spirituality the more you see that you are playing a verified and lofty form of an old ego game come on and that your attainment of any height is apparent to yourself and to others only by contrast with someone else’s depth or failure” ( 120 ) 
“the sense of paralysis is therefore the dawning realization that this is nonsense and that your independent ego is a fiction” ( 121 )
“but when you know for sure that your separate ego is a fiction, you actually feel yourself as the whole process and pattern of life. Experience and experience are become one experience, known and newer one knowing” ( 121 )
“what happens is neither automatic nor arbitrary: it just happened, and all happenings are mutually interdependent in a way that seems unbelievably harmonious. Every this goes with everything. Without others there is no self, and without somewhere else there is no here, so that in a sense self is other and here is there” ( 124)
“In immediate contrast to the old feeling, there is indeed a certain passivity to the sensation, as if you were a leaf blown along by the wind, until you realize that you are both belief and the wind. The wind outside your skin is just as much you as a world inside: they moved together in separably, at first you feel a little out of control because the world outside is so much faster than the world inside. Yet you soon discover that you are able to go ahead with ordinary activities to work and make decisions as ever, though somehow this is less of a drag. Your body is no longer a corpse which the ego has to animate and longer round. There's a feeling of the ground holding you up, and of hills lifting you when you climb them. Air breathes itself in and out of your lungs, and instead of looking and listening, light and sound come to you on their own. I see and ears here as wind blows and water flows. All space becomes your mind period time carries you along like a river, but never flows out of the present: the more it goes, the more it stays, and you no longer have to fight or kill it” ( 125)
“You do not ask what is the value, or what is the use, of this feeling period of what uses the universe? What is the practical application of a million galaxies? Yet just because it has no use, it has a use which made sound like a paradox, but it's not. What, for instance, is the use of playing music? If you played and make money, to outdo some other artists, to be a person of culture, or to improve your mind, you're not really playing for your mind is not on the music. You don't swing. When you come to think of it, playing or listening to music is a pure luxury, and addiction, a waste of valuable time and money for nothing more than making elaborate patterns of sound. Yet what would you think of a society which had no place for music, we should not allow for dancing, or for any activity not directly involved with the practical problems of survival? Obviously, such a society would be surviving with no purpose unless it could somehow make a light out of that “essential tasks” of farming, building, soldiering, manufacturing, or cooking. But in that moment the goal of survival is forgotten. The tasks are being done for their own sake, whereupon farms begin to look like gardens, sensible living boxes sprout interesting roofs and mysterious ornaments, arms engraved with curious patterns, carpenters take time to “finish” their work, and cooks become gourmets” ( 125 )
“A Chinese philosophical work called the secret of the golden flower says that “when purpose has been used to achieve purposelessness, the thing has been grasped.” For a society surviving to no purpose is one that makes no provision for purposeless behavior that is, for actions not directly aimed at survival, which fulfilled themselves in being done in the present and do not necessarily imply some future reward. But indirectly and unintentionally, such behavior is useful for survival because it gives a point to surviving not, however, when pursued for that reason to play so as to be relaxed and refreshed for work is not to play and no work is well and finally done unless it, too, is a form of play” (126)
“The point is that “spectacle is so fascinating.” for the world is a spell, an enchantment, an amazement, an arabesque of such stunning rhythm and a plot so intriguing that we are drawn by its web into a state of involvement where we forget that it is a game. We become fascinated to the point where the cheering and the booing are transformed into intense love and hate, or delight and terror, ecstatic orgasm or screaming meemies. All made out of on-and-off or black-and-white, pulsed, stuttered, diagrammed mosaiced, syncopated, shaded, jolted, tangoed, lilted through all possible measures and dimensions. It is simultaneously the purest nonsense and the uttermost artistry” ( 129 )
“you have seen that the universe is at root a magical illusion in a fabulous game, and that there is no separate “you” to get something out of it, as of life for a blank to be robbed” ( 130 )
“what we see as death, empty space, or nothingness is only the through between the crests of this endlessly waving ocean. It is all part of the illusion that there should seem to be something to be gained in the future, and that there is an urgent necessity to go on and on until we get it. Yet just as there is no time but the present, and no one except the all in everything, there is never anything to be gained though the zest of  the game is to pretend that there is” ( 131 )
“the morality that goes with this understanding is, above all, the frank recognition of your dependence upon enemies, underlings, outgroups, and indeed, upon all other forms of life whatsoever” ( 132 )
“these hatreds are not going to be healed, but only inflamed, by insulting those who feel them, and abusive labels with which we plaster them squares, fascist, rightists, no nothings may well become the proud badges and symbols or on which they will rally and consolidate themselves” ( 133 )
“does it really take any considerable time or effort just to understand that you depend on enemies and outsiders to define yourself, and that without some opposition you would be lost?” ( 134 )
“It comes, then, to this: that to be “viable,” livable, or merely practical, life must be lived as a game and the “must” here expresses a condition, not a commandment. It must be lived in the spirit of play rather than work, and the conflicts which it involves must be carried on in the realization that no species, or party to a game, can survive without its natural antagonists, its beloved enemies, it's indispensable opponents” ( 135 )
“however much we may now disagree with Aristotle’s logic and as metaphors, he must still be respected for reminding us that the goal of action is always contemplation knowing and being rather than seeking and becoming” (137 )
“but suppose you could answer it, it would take me forever to tell you, and I am much too interested in what's happening now” ( 137 )
“every intelligent individual wants to know what makes him tick, and yet is at once fascinated and frustrated by the fact that oneself is the most difficult of all things to know” ( 140 )
“if, as we have been arguing, the only real atom -as the Chardin put it- is the universe, and the only real thing is everything then what is it?” ( 141 )
“to define is to limit, to set boundaries, to compare and to contrast, and for this reason the universe, the all, seems to divide definition” ( 141 )
“as I said in the beginning, it is just unbelievably odd that anything is happening at all” ( 142 )
“it is rather that metaphysical wonder looks for an experience, a vision, a revelation which will explain come without words, why there is the universe, and what it is much as the act of loving explains why we are male and female)“142”
“historically, this is probably the extreme point of that swing of the intellectual pendulum which brought into fashion the fully automatic model of the universe, of the age of analysis and specialization when we lost our vision of the universe in the overwhelming complexity of its details” (147)
“if it were possible, I am losing the sense of it by attempting to find it.” ( 151 )
“One cannot, and need not, go deeper than deep!” (151)
“however, our image of man is changing as it becomes clearer and clearer that the human being is not simply and only his physical Organism. My body is also my total environment, and this must be measured in light years in the billions” ( 154 )
“all she is saying is that she has lost touch with her own astonishing wisdom and ingenuity, and wants to be admired for some trivial tricks that she can perform with her conscious attention. And we are all in the same situation, having disassociated ourselves from our bodies and from the whole network of forces in which bodies can come your birth and live” ( 155 )
Life is an experience and a game, but not a game to win something in the end. No one wins. 
Miracles must exist because our universe in itself is a miracle!
The universe works simultaneously with you, not against you. 


